# On Saying No

## Why to Say No
 
*This chapter is primary focused towards academics conducting research. While it may apply to other fields, it discusses choosing which studies to conduct, which may be a privilege not afforded to other jobs. For this reason, please feel free to skip this chapter if you'd like.*^[Academics who have more hourly tweets than lifetime publications should stop reading this chapter and start writing more papers.]

Academia is built on uncertainty. This is most clearly evident in how our currency of published papers are evaluated - through anonymous reviewers that in many cases want different things from your paper which means that you may spend equal time writing the paper as revising it for the whims of reviewers, often in areas that don't actually address the core of the paper.^[The idea that reviewers are indeed anonymous is one lie that academics like to tell others in public but all should know to be false. The prevalence of working papers published on personal websites or preprint websites mean that few papers are truly anonymous. The insistence of certain reviewers to (pathetically) demand that several of their own papers be cited in the paper that they are reviewing (and the editor's acceptance of these ridiculous 'suggestions') also means that not all reviewers are anonymous.] But the most serious avenue of uncertainty for academics, and the least visible, is that you never know what you have to do to achieve your career goals. If you're a PhD student, how many papers do you need to be hired? If you're an assistant professor, how many papers or service committees do you need to get tenure? There is no clear answer - other than that "more is always better." For this reason, academics tend to say yes to everything. 

Academics are *terrible* at saying no. This has become a (often playful or self-pitying) meme about how academics juggle too many things and can't focus (or have no free time). But it is, in my opinion, a serious problem in the field and one that's actually not that hard to solve.^[Over-extending oneself is often seen publicly in people's affiliations where one academic is affiliated to multiple organizations or causes and actually spends very little time doing any work on these affiliated projects.] In my experience, academics - and particularly early career academics - approach every offer to do something with the question "will this help me?" The answer is, in almost every case, YES. Almost everything that you're asked to do will help you. 

This isn't to say that academics just accept everything for no reason. Part of the reason that I think academics accept doing so much is because so much turns out to be useless (in terms of career benefit) because many projects don't pan out - data sometimes can't answer your question at all, results may be non-significant (which shouldn't be a reason to kill a project but null results are harder to publish so some people don't try to publish them), co-authors stop responding to emails.^[If you are one of my co-authors who is currently waiting for my email, please be patient.] So by necessity you need to accept more than you think is necessary since you know that some of it won't work out. The second, and a major factor in this, is that the entire culture of academia supports always saying yes. And, importantly, people see agreeing to everything as demonstrating that you are providing "service" to your department and to the field by doing everything they ask for - even when saying yes actually makes you worse at doing each of the things you agreed to do.^[Another potential reason is that academia tends to come in waves. All the bad news tends to come at once, as does all the good news. Given this lack of consistency it makes sense to try to keep doing even more since you know that the good times never last - and the bad times can last for a very long time (my first paper was accepted in its first round of reviews for the first journal it was submitted to. Every paper after that for two years was rejected.). It's easy to feel good about your work when you get good news and be willing to do more work. It's also easy - easier in fact - to be willing to do more work just to try to eventually get something with a positive outcome during the bad periods.]

This book is focused on making research more efficient. Nearly everything in this book can be done manually - from subsetting data to webscraping, you can do it by hand - though doing so would be incredibly inefficient. Over-extending oneself, which is the inevitable outcome of not being able to say no to things, is also inefficient. Research takes time. If you have 10 active projects, you will be less effective than working on 3. If you're trying to solve a complicated programming question, like one you've encountered in this book, it may, for example, take you an hour to solve it. But this is an hour focusing on the problem and not being distracted by anything else. If you spend 30 minutes on it and then get distracted you may lose all the work (which in many cases in solving programming problems is all in your head, not writing code) you've done and have to start from scratch. To give another example, if you need to bake a cake for an hour you need to keep it in the oven the whole time. You can't put it in for 10 minutes and take it out then put it back it - you need to leave it to cook! 

Research works the same way. You need to spend a lot of time focusing and thinking (literally just thinking, not writing or reading or anything visible. Just thinking about whether what you're doing makes sense and what it means) about the project to get it done. So splitting up that time is far more destructive to efficiency than it may seem if you believe that finishing a project is merely spending X hours on the project, no matter how you split up X.^[A small number of criminologists seem to put out an incredible number of papers each year. I commend their co-authors for this accomplishment.]

## When to say no

As an academic - every for early graduate students - there is a growing number of things you're asked to do: teach classes, attend class, serve on committees, do research many different research projects with many different people, give lectures to other people's classes, present at conferences, review papers, etc. Doing everything is unfeasible - so you need a way to narrow down what you want to do. Some of these are mandatory - you need to, for example, write papers and teach classes as a professor. For the options items, I think that it is important to determine your short and long term goals and use them to guide your choices. If, for example, you're a professor at a teaching university where research requirements are light, then there is no need to do a lot of research unless you like doing it. Personally I enjoy doing research and don't see the need to network much so I turn down requests to guest lecture or present my research and focus on writing papers. Even once you chose your goals, you may still have too many things you're asked or expected to do. So how do you narrow it down further? For the most part, you don't. There is no foolproof way to rank or chose the most valuable projects but below are some ways I've used that I think will be helpful. 

As you become more experienced with the field you get to know what (broadly speaking) timelines are for certain types of projects and the reward you get from it (e.g. novel research is generally considered more important than replication research). So you can get a very rough sketch of where a project will go and how long it will take. Though of course these estimates can be very off - and generally everything takes much longer than expected. This will be helpful at least at managing your time since you're be better able to estimate when you've reached maximum capacity - once you have, just say no to all future projects until you've finished these. This is something that you can really only learn through experience or by talking to someone who has more experience. 

If you don't want to do something, don't do it. Really. Some unpleasant tasks are unavoidable but when given the choice between an unpleasant tasks and an enjoyable one, choose the enjoyable one. You'll be happier and work better for it. 

A major part of the pleasantness of a task is who you do it with or for. There are some awful people in academia. Truly awful people - and people who may be influential in the field. These run the gamut from those who will belittle you to the sexual predators at conferences - or among their own graduate students - and everything in between.^[In academia you can - in some cases - make up data or, as a professor, sexually harass or have sexual relationships with your graduate students and you'll be rewarded with journal editorship or at least keep your job just as long as you publish well or already have tenure.] It seems obvious to say, but don't work with these people. Even if these people are on the lower end of the awful spectrum, and if they could potentially help your career in the future, don't work with them. From a work standpoint, you will do your best work with people who respect you and will build you up. From a personal standpoint, you should (I hope) want to work with smart people who are fun to work with. Don't allow yourself to live by a lower standard!

## How to Say No

This seems obvious. If you don't want to do something - or don't have the time to do it well - just decline an offer. Be polite, thank them for the offer and then say no. If you need the need to explain yourself - you don't! - then say something like you have too many projects at the moment and can't do this new thing. When you say no, just say no. If someone asks you to do something, they either value your work and input or are just using you since they know you'll say yes. In the second case, they won't look negatively upon you for saying no - and if they do, they aren't someone you want to work with.^[Personally, I'd be much more likely to work with someone if I knew they prioritized a few key projects rather than work a tiny bit on many projects and took forever to finish any of them.] In the second case, not working with them is certainly the good choice. 

If any of this - that the way to say no is to say no - seems facetious, it isn't. Saying no simply, promptly, and politely is, in my opinion, the best way to do it. Doing so will also reduce the level of uncertainty for others since they will have a clear - and importantly, prompt - decision from you and can ask someone else. 
